README.md, before:

# OMV Full Disk Encryption with LUKS

This documents shows a way to encrypt all data (incl. OMV) and unlocking it via
ssh at boot time. This seems to be the only applicable way, as after boot and
encrypted data drives only, this has had major influence on system usability
(i.e. Docker mount on data lead to massive errors).

In general the approach is a fresh OMV install and a livecd with enabled `ssh`.

1. Install OMV as of documentation
2. Boot into live and make the OS drive enrypted with `luks`
3. Enrypt data drives and make the decryption derive from the OS drive

> This approach seems to be scalable and doable, as the `dropbear` unlock
> approach is limited to one drive.

> Create your usb stick with `dd` or apps like `mkusb` or `Ventoy`.

## OMV setup

### basic setup

Follow the documentation: https://openmediavault.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/index.html

- Set admin ui password
- if needed change admin ui port
- copy your pub key for user root (`ssh-copy-id [-i keyfile.pub] root@<ip>`)
- (disable ssh password login)
- update to latest state (`apt update && apt dist-upgrade`)

### dropbear setup (This section is still Work in Progress, and doesn't fully work yet)

Make sure following packages are present

```sh
apt install cryptsetup-initramfs
apt install busybox-static dropbear-initramfs
```

> please refer to `/usr/share/doc/dropbear-initramfs/README.initramfs` and `/usr/share/doc/cryptsetup/README.Debian.gz` Section 8

extend `/etc/initramfs-tools/initramfs.conf` to set a static IP during boot

```sh
DEVICE=eno1  # change to you ethernet device
IP=$yourIP::$routerIP:255.255.255.0:$yourHostname
DROPBEAR=y
```

I am on a local lan and with port forwarding I do not want to expose dropbear to the
net. There I add `DROPBEAR_OPTIONS="-I 180 -j -k -p 2222 -s -c cryptroot-unlock"` to `/etc/dropbear/initramfs/dropbear.conf` (or `/etc/dropbear-initramfs/config` on older distributions)
to change the listening port to 2222. (see https://www.cyberciti.biz/security/how-to-unlock-luks-using-dropbear-ssh-keys-remotely-in-linux/)

DROPBEAR_OPTIONS="-I 180 -j -k -p 2222 -s -c cryptroot-unlock"

Now paste your public ssh key to the `authorized_keys` file.

```sh
echo "ssh-rsa ..." >> /etc/dropbear-initramfs/authorized_keys
chmod 600 /etc/dropbear-initramfs/authorized_keys
```

Update the boot image

```sh
update-initramfs -u -k all
update-grub
```

> in case of perl language setting errors use `dpkg-reconfigure locales`

To later connect without host key error (you may of course use a specific ssh config)

```sh
ssh -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p2222 root@<ip>
```


## Live Boot USB Stick

Choose a live cd (or rescue system from your hoster) and enable `ssh`.
This makes things easier by copy pasting or chilling on the couch.

> I use (debian live)[https://cdimage.debian.org/debian-cd/current-live/amd64/iso-hybrid/]
> and enable `sshd` after boot manually (here)[http://www.zoyinc.com/?p=2510]

Create the live usb stick with

```sh
$ sudo dd if=./debian-live-9.3.0-amd64-lxde.iso of=/dev/sdb bs=4096
```

## Encrypt OMV drive

### Partition overview

In order to encrypt the omv drive, we need to save the OS drive and repartition
the device with `luks`.

To get an overview of the partitions to migrate use `lsblk`. In my case the OS
drive is `sda`.

```sh
# lsblk 
NAME   MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
sda      8:0    0  128G  0 disk 
├─sda1   8:1    0  127G  0 part /
├─sda2   8:2    0    1K  0 part 
└─sda5   8:5    0  975M  0 part [SWAP]
sdb      8:16   0  256G  0 disk 
sr0     11:0    1  2.8G  0 rom  
```

OMV creates those by default. We do want to change this to
`/boot` (unencrypted), `swap` (later encrypted randomly), `/` (encrypted).

### Boot into live USB and ssh into it

Select your usb stick at bios boot to use this instead of the hdd.
Enable `sshd`, if not enabled.

```sh
sudo apt update && sudo apt install openssh-server
sudo passwd root
sudo su - root
```

`/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
```sh
PermitRootLogin yes
PasswordAuthentication yes
```

```sh
service ssh restart
```

Login with `ssh`, create the backup of the mounted drive.

```sh
$ ssh root@192.168.x.x
```

### backup of omv


This should run without errors and copies `/dev/sdx#` to the `ramdisk`. As omv
is rather small in size, this should not take too long.

```sh
mkdir /oldroot
mount /dev/sda1 /mnt
rsync -a /mnt/ /oldroot/
umount /mnt
```

Now that we have a local backup, it is possible to encrypt the drive.

### partitioning and encryption

> make sure you select the correct device `/dev/sdx#`

```sh
cfdisk /dev/sda
```

A screen opens, where all partitions are deleted.

![cfdisk pre cfdisk](cfdisk_original.png)

The new partitions look like this:

- `sdx1`: 250MB, type EFI System
- `sdx2`: 1GB, type 83 Linux, bootable
- `sdx3`: 16GB (choose your desired `swap` size), type 83 Linux for later encryption
- `sdx4`: rest, type 83 Linux

![cfdisk post cfdisk](cfdisk_encryption.png)

Do not forget to write the changes.

The EFI system partition (ESP) is to be formatted in FAT32 (when using UEFI BIOS) and mounted at `/boot/efi`. `sdx2` is a separate partition to be mounted at `/boot` and will be unencrypted and formatted in ext4.
`sdx3` will be used as swap and formatted and encrypted later on.
`sdx4` will be encrypted and used as root partition.

![cfdisk write](cfdisk_write.png)

More information on the partitioning scheme in the article [Arch-Wiki/Partitioning#Example_layouts](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Partitioning#Example_layouts). But remember that when using UEFI BIOS a FAT32 formatted ESP is necessary and since Debian-based distributions require symbolic links in the /boot directory is cannot be formatted all in FAT32, hence the separation of ESP and /boot partition.

Check the partitions with `lsblk` and make the boot filesystem. This is necessary to make a working filesystem, without that the ESP will not work properly.

```sh
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1
mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda2
```

More information about the EFI System Partition in the [Arch-Wiki article on EFI_system_partition](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/EFI_system_partition).

Now let's encrypt the root partition `sda4` and choosing a strong encryption key.

```sh
apt update && apt install cryptsetup
modprobe dm-crypt
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 --label OMV luksFormat /dev/sda4
```

To read more about the options of encryption using luks check the [Arch-Wiki article on Device encryption](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode).

Verify it worked with

```sh
cryptsetup luksDump /dev/sda4
```

Lets open the drive and create a filesystem

```sh
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda4 croot
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/croot
```

Read more about full system encryption in the [Arch-Wiki article on Encrypting an entire system](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system#LUKS_on_a_partition). Altough we chose a different scheme here, that requires separate ESP and boot partitions since we are using UEFI BIOS and a non-Arch-based distribution, that requires symbolic links in the /boot directory, which FAT32 does not support.

### restore OMV

```sh
mkdir /newroot
mount /dev/mapper/root /newroot
mkdir /newroot/boot
mount /dev/sda2 /newroot/boot
mkdir /newroot/boot/efi
mount /dev/sda1 /newroot/boot/efi
rsync -a /oldroot/ /newroot/
```

Then bind folders needed to `chroot`

```sh
mount --bind /dev /newroot/dev
mount --bind /sys /newroot/sys
mount --bind /proc /newroot/proc
chroot /newroot
```

Next we will update everything

```sh
/etc/fstab:
/dev/mapper/root / ext4 defaults 0 2
UUID=<uuid of /dev/sda2> /boot ext4 defaults 0 1
UUID=<uuid of /dev/sda1> /boot/efi vfat defaults 0 1
# swap was on /dev/sda3 during installation
/dev/sda3 none            swap    sw              0       0
```

Reference article on the structure and options of the fstab: [Debian-Wiki/fstab](https://wiki.debian.org/fstab).

Use UUID to make sure the correct drive is mounted (`blkid /dev/sda4`)

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
# <target name>	<source device>		<key file>	<options>
root UUID=<uuid> none luks
```

RESUME is not wanted in initramfs

```sh
rm /etc/initramfs-tools/conf.d/resume
```

Update `/boot`

```sh
update-initramfs -u -k all
update-grub
grub-install /dev/sda  # this might yield an error, if it does use alternative commands, explained below.
```

If `grub-install` throws an error it could be that you have booted in non-UEFI mode, try:

```sh
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot/efi --removable
```

More information in the [Arch-Wiki/GRUB](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/GRUB).

`--efi-directory` specifies the directory to install grub to.
`--target` specifies the platform the system is running from.
`--removable` add support for non UEFI booted live mediums. This might not be relevant when booting with UEFI mode enabled.

You can verify whether you are booted in UEFI mode by running

```sh
efibootmgr
```

If it returns an error like `EFI variables are not supported on this system`, you are booted in legacy BIOS mode.

Found some more articles here:
[How to Restore an EFI Boot Partition](https://www.baeldung.com/linux/efi-boot-partition-restore).
[Superuse.com/Linux from Scratch - EFI variables are not supported on this system](https://superuser.com/questions/1738694/linux-from-scratch-efi-variables-are-not-supported-on-this-system).

> `pre-up` lead to not working network with me. Just as a reminder...

To proper unload the dropbear network settings add the `pre-up` to the corresponding
$IFACE

```sh
/etc/network/interfaces:
iface enp2s0 inet static
    pre-up ip adr flush dev $IFACE
    ...
```

### live system reboot

umount every device after leaving the `chroot` and reboot

```sh
logout
umount /newroot/boot
umount /newroot/proc
umount /newroot/sys
umount /newroot/dev
umount /newroot
reboot
```

> make sure the livecd is not booted

## boot the system

log into the dropbear and run `cryptroot-unlock`

```sh
ssh -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p2222 root@x
Warning: Permanently added '[x]:2222' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
To unlock root partition, and maybe others like swap, run `cryptroot-unlock`


BusyBox v1.22.1 (Debian 1:1.22.0-19+b3) built-in shell (ash)
Enter 'help' for a list of built-in commands.

~ # cryptroot-unlock
Please unlock disk root: <paste key>
cryptsetup: root set up successfully
```

Now you are able to login like normal and access OMV.
Next swap will be encrypted. Currently `free` should show 0 swap.

## encrypted swap

find the unique partition and use it as swap (UUID is always different, so not
usable)

```sh
find -L /dev/disk -samefile /dev/sda2
```

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
swap /dev/disk/by-id/ata-Samsung_SSD_840_PRO_Series_<...>-part2 /dev/urandom swap,cipher=aes-xts-plain64:sha256
```

```sh
/etc/fstab:
/dev/mapper/swap none swap sw 0 0
```

After a reboot `lsblk` output will be

```sh
NAME     MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
sda        8:0    0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdb        8:16   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdc        8:32   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdd        8:48   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sde        8:64   0 119,2G  0 disk  
├─sde1     8:65   0     1G  0 part  /boot
├─sde2     8:66   0    16G  0 part  
│ └─swap 253:1    0    16G  0 crypt [SWAP]
└─sde3     8:67   0 102,2G  0 part  
  └─root 253:0    0 102,2G  0 crypt /
```

## encrypt data drives and derive keys from root

In our case we plan to use a ZFS RAID on top of LUKS encrypted drives. This can be done by either encrypting the whole drives or individual a partition on each drive. It could be that having the partition encrypted might be a bit safer since the luks header is not at the beginning of the drive in case some other program accidentally overwrote it (see [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/571581/are-there-any-advantages-disadvantages-if-any-in-running-luksformat-on-raw-dr)).
Since using LUKS on the partition doesn't really hurt and ZFS can work with whole disks of partitions we are going to do that.

So first we're going to create new partition tables using fdisk or another tool.
Then we create a partition that's leaving about 100MB spare in case a replacement disk is a little (even a few sectors) smaller (got the idea [here](https://www.freebsddiary.org/zfs-with-gpart.php)).
To leave that amount of space we're calculating the exact end sector:
With a sector size of 512 byte 200MB is 390625 sectors.
So with a drive with 10TB and 19532873728 sectors the start sector is 2048 (because or the partition table) and the end sector is 19532481054. 

```bash
root@openmediavault:~# fdisk /dev/sda

Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.38.1).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 9.1 TiB, 10000831348736 bytes, 19532873728 sectors
Disk model: WDC WD102KFBX-68
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 1D2C9CA2-615C-694B-8C22-A255236BA674

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (1-128, default 1): 
First sector (2048-19532873694, default 2048): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-19532873694, default 19532871679): 19532481054

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 9.1 TiB.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 9.1 TiB, 10000831348736 bytes, 19532873728 sectors
Disk model: WDC WD102KFBX-68
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 1D2C9CA2-615C-694B-8C22-A255236BA674

Device     Start         End     Sectors  Size Type
/dev/sda1   2048 19532481054 19532479007  9.1T Linux filesystem

```

I setup for each data drive the same LUKS key and a second key that is derived
from root decrypt. This way at boot only one key is necessary but "in case"
the drives can be unlocked on their own.

Again, with `lsblk` show all drives.

### enrypt drives with backup key

Initial creation will be with an initial key, which is used to unlock in case
of emergency.

```sh
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sda1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdb1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdc1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdd1
```

### create keyfiles and crypttab

Now lets add the keyfile to the encrypted partitions.
First create a random keyfile

```sh
dd bs=512 count=4 if=/dev/random iflag=fullblock | install -m 0600 /dev/stdin /root/.luks/keyfile
```


```sh
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sda1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdb1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdc1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdd1 /root/.luks/keyfile
```

`cryptsetup luksDump /dev/sda` now shows 2 keys.

Next append to `crypttab`, timeout is added to make it boot even in case of error. It might be preferrable to choose another name instead of sdX-crypt since the letters can change. One could use the serialnumber or model number of the device. Find it by running `find -L /dev/disk -samefile /dev/sda` and match it to the UUID.

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
# data drives
sda-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdb-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdc-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdd-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
```

Reboot and check if everything is mounted correctly. This example was kept from the forked repository. With different drives the output will differ. When choosing different names in the crypttab the mounting points will also differ.

```sh
lsblk
NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
sda           8:0    0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sda-crypt 253:2    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdb           8:16   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdb-crypt 253:4    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdc           8:32   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdc-crypt 253:5    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdd           8:48   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdd-crypt 253:3    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sde           8:64   0 119,2G  0 disk  
├─sde1        8:65   0     1G  0 part  /boot
├─sde2        8:66   0    16G  0 part  
│ └─swap    253:1    0    16G  0 crypt [SWAP]
└─sde3        8:67   0 102,2G  0 part  
  └─root    253:0    0 102,2G  0 crypt /
```

From here you may start to use OMV as you like. If a drive is appended, use
the commands from above and add it to `/etc/crypttab`.

> OMV drive encryption plugin is usable as well to add the key and backup headers.

## create zfs pool

Now whenever normaly refering to `/dev/sda` just use `/dev/mapper/sda-crypt` instead.

```sh
zpool create drivepool raidz /dev/mapper/sda-crypt /dev/mapper/sdb-crypt /dev/mapper/sdc-crypt /dev/mapper/sdd-crypt
```

This will create a raid pool with all four disks and a RAID 5 (1 drive parity) configuration.

> OMV ZFS plugin can be used to check on the drive pool.

Commit message:

Add link to wiki article on ZFS

README.md, after:

# OMV Full Disk Encryption with LUKS

This documents shows a way to encrypt all data (incl. OMV) and unlocking it via
ssh at boot time. This seems to be the only applicable way, as after boot and
encrypted data drives only, this has had major influence on system usability
(i.e. Docker mount on data lead to massive errors).

In general the approach is a fresh OMV install and a livecd with enabled `ssh`.

1. Install OMV as of documentation
2. Boot into live and make the OS drive enrypted with `luks`
3. Enrypt data drives and make the decryption derive from the OS drive

> This approach seems to be scalable and doable, as the `dropbear` unlock
> approach is limited to one drive.

> Create your usb stick with `dd` or apps like `mkusb` or `Ventoy`.

## OMV setup

### basic setup

Follow the documentation: https://openmediavault.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/index.html

- Set admin ui password
- if needed change admin ui port
- copy your pub key for user root (`ssh-copy-id [-i keyfile.pub] root@<ip>`)
- (disable ssh password login)
- update to latest state (`apt update && apt dist-upgrade`)

### dropbear setup (This section is still Work in Progress, and doesn't fully work yet)

Make sure following packages are present

```sh
apt install cryptsetup-initramfs
apt install busybox-static dropbear-initramfs
```

> please refer to `/usr/share/doc/dropbear-initramfs/README.initramfs` and `/usr/share/doc/cryptsetup/README.Debian.gz` Section 8

extend `/etc/initramfs-tools/initramfs.conf` to set a static IP during boot

```sh
DEVICE=eno1  # change to you ethernet device
IP=$yourIP::$routerIP:255.255.255.0:$yourHostname
DROPBEAR=y
```

I am on a local lan and with port forwarding I do not want to expose dropbear to the
net. There I add `DROPBEAR_OPTIONS="-I 180 -j -k -p 2222 -s -c cryptroot-unlock"` to `/etc/dropbear/initramfs/dropbear.conf` (or `/etc/dropbear-initramfs/config` on older distributions)
to change the listening port to 2222. (see https://www.cyberciti.biz/security/how-to-unlock-luks-using-dropbear-ssh-keys-remotely-in-linux/)

DROPBEAR_OPTIONS="-I 180 -j -k -p 2222 -s -c cryptroot-unlock"

Now paste your public ssh key to the `authorized_keys` file.

```sh
echo "ssh-rsa ..." >> /etc/dropbear-initramfs/authorized_keys
chmod 600 /etc/dropbear-initramfs/authorized_keys
```

Update the boot image

```sh
update-initramfs -u -k all
update-grub
```

> in case of perl language setting errors use `dpkg-reconfigure locales`

To later connect without host key error (you may of course use a specific ssh config)

```sh
ssh -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p2222 root@<ip>
```


## Live Boot USB Stick

Choose a live cd (or rescue system from your hoster) and enable `ssh`.
This makes things easier by copy pasting or chilling on the couch.

> I use (debian live)[https://cdimage.debian.org/debian-cd/current-live/amd64/iso-hybrid/]
> and enable `sshd` after boot manually (here)[http://www.zoyinc.com/?p=2510]

Create the live usb stick with

```sh
$ sudo dd if=./debian-live-9.3.0-amd64-lxde.iso of=/dev/sdb bs=4096
```

## Encrypt OMV drive

### Partition overview

In order to encrypt the omv drive, we need to save the OS drive and repartition
the device with `luks`.

To get an overview of the partitions to migrate use `lsblk`. In my case the OS
drive is `sda`.

```sh
# lsblk 
NAME   MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
sda      8:0    0  128G  0 disk 
├─sda1   8:1    0  127G  0 part /
├─sda2   8:2    0    1K  0 part 
└─sda5   8:5    0  975M  0 part [SWAP]
sdb      8:16   0  256G  0 disk 
sr0     11:0    1  2.8G  0 rom  
```

OMV creates those by default. We do want to change this to
`/boot` (unencrypted), `swap` (later encrypted randomly), `/` (encrypted).

### Boot into live USB and ssh into it

Select your usb stick at bios boot to use this instead of the hdd.
Enable `sshd`, if not enabled.

```sh
sudo apt update && sudo apt install openssh-server
sudo passwd root
sudo su - root
```

`/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
```sh
PermitRootLogin yes
PasswordAuthentication yes
```

```sh
service ssh restart
```

Login with `ssh`, create the backup of the mounted drive.

```sh
$ ssh root@192.168.x.x
```

### backup of omv


This should run without errors and copies `/dev/sdx#` to the `ramdisk`. As omv
is rather small in size, this should not take too long.

```sh
mkdir /oldroot
mount /dev/sda1 /mnt
rsync -a /mnt/ /oldroot/
umount /mnt
```

Now that we have a local backup, it is possible to encrypt the drive.

### partitioning and encryption

> make sure you select the correct device `/dev/sdx#`

```sh
cfdisk /dev/sda
```

A screen opens, where all partitions are deleted.

![cfdisk pre cfdisk](cfdisk_original.png)

The new partitions look like this:

- `sdx1`: 250MB, type EFI System
- `sdx2`: 1GB, type 83 Linux, bootable
- `sdx3`: 16GB (choose your desired `swap` size), type 83 Linux for later encryption
- `sdx4`: rest, type 83 Linux

![cfdisk post cfdisk](cfdisk_encryption.png)

Do not forget to write the changes.

The EFI system partition (ESP) is to be formatted in FAT32 (when using UEFI BIOS) and mounted at `/boot/efi`. `sdx2` is a separate partition to be mounted at `/boot` and will be unencrypted and formatted in ext4.
`sdx3` will be used as swap and formatted and encrypted later on.
`sdx4` will be encrypted and used as root partition.

![cfdisk write](cfdisk_write.png)

More information on the partitioning scheme in the article [Arch-Wiki/Partitioning#Example_layouts](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Partitioning#Example_layouts). But remember that when using UEFI BIOS a FAT32 formatted ESP is necessary and since Debian-based distributions require symbolic links in the /boot directory is cannot be formatted all in FAT32, hence the separation of ESP and /boot partition.

Check the partitions with `lsblk` and make the boot filesystem. This is necessary to make a working filesystem, without that the ESP will not work properly.

```sh
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1
mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda2
```

More information about the EFI System Partition in the [Arch-Wiki article on EFI_system_partition](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/EFI_system_partition).

Now let's encrypt the root partition `sda4` and choosing a strong encryption key.

```sh
apt update && apt install cryptsetup
modprobe dm-crypt
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 --label OMV luksFormat /dev/sda4
```

To read more about the options of encryption using luks check the [Arch-Wiki article on Device encryption](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Device_encryption#Encryption_options_for_LUKS_mode).

Verify it worked with

```sh
cryptsetup luksDump /dev/sda4
```

Lets open the drive and create a filesystem

```sh
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/sda4 croot
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/croot
```

Read more about full system encryption in the [Arch-Wiki article on Encrypting an entire system](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Encrypting_an_entire_system#LUKS_on_a_partition). Altough we chose a different scheme here, that requires separate ESP and boot partitions since we are using UEFI BIOS and a non-Arch-based distribution, that requires symbolic links in the /boot directory, which FAT32 does not support.

### restore OMV

```sh
mkdir /newroot
mount /dev/mapper/root /newroot
mkdir /newroot/boot
mount /dev/sda2 /newroot/boot
mkdir /newroot/boot/efi
mount /dev/sda1 /newroot/boot/efi
rsync -a /oldroot/ /newroot/
```

Then bind folders needed to `chroot`

```sh
mount --bind /dev /newroot/dev
mount --bind /sys /newroot/sys
mount --bind /proc /newroot/proc
chroot /newroot
```

Next we will update everything

```sh
/etc/fstab:
/dev/mapper/root / ext4 defaults 0 2
UUID=<uuid of /dev/sda2> /boot ext4 defaults 0 1
UUID=<uuid of /dev/sda1> /boot/efi vfat defaults 0 1
# swap was on /dev/sda3 during installation
/dev/sda3 none            swap    sw              0       0
```

Reference article on the structure and options of the fstab: [Debian-Wiki/fstab](https://wiki.debian.org/fstab).

Use UUID to make sure the correct drive is mounted (`blkid /dev/sda4`)

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
# <target name>	<source device>		<key file>	<options>
root UUID=<uuid> none luks
```

RESUME is not wanted in initramfs

```sh
rm /etc/initramfs-tools/conf.d/resume
```

Update `/boot`

```sh
update-initramfs -u -k all
update-grub
grub-install /dev/sda  # this might yield an error, if it does use alternative commands, explained below.
```

If `grub-install` throws an error it could be that you have booted in non-UEFI mode, try:

```sh
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot/efi --removable
```

More information in the [Arch-Wiki/GRUB](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/GRUB).

`--efi-directory` specifies the directory to install grub to.
`--target` specifies the platform the system is running from.
`--removable` add support for non UEFI booted live mediums. This might not be relevant when booting with UEFI mode enabled.

You can verify whether you are booted in UEFI mode by running

```sh
efibootmgr
```

If it returns an error like `EFI variables are not supported on this system`, you are booted in legacy BIOS mode.

Found some more articles here:
[How to Restore an EFI Boot Partition](https://www.baeldung.com/linux/efi-boot-partition-restore).
[Superuse.com/Linux from Scratch - EFI variables are not supported on this system](https://superuser.com/questions/1738694/linux-from-scratch-efi-variables-are-not-supported-on-this-system).

> `pre-up` lead to not working network with me. Just as a reminder...

To proper unload the dropbear network settings add the `pre-up` to the corresponding
$IFACE

```sh
/etc/network/interfaces:
iface enp2s0 inet static
    pre-up ip adr flush dev $IFACE
    ...
```

### live system reboot

umount every device after leaving the `chroot` and reboot

```sh
logout
umount /newroot/boot
umount /newroot/proc
umount /newroot/sys
umount /newroot/dev
umount /newroot
reboot
```

> make sure the livecd is not booted

## boot the system

log into the dropbear and run `cryptroot-unlock`

```sh
ssh -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p2222 root@x
Warning: Permanently added '[x]:2222' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
To unlock root partition, and maybe others like swap, run `cryptroot-unlock`


BusyBox v1.22.1 (Debian 1:1.22.0-19+b3) built-in shell (ash)
Enter 'help' for a list of built-in commands.

~ # cryptroot-unlock
Please unlock disk root: <paste key>
cryptsetup: root set up successfully
```

Now you are able to login like normal and access OMV.
Next swap will be encrypted. Currently `free` should show 0 swap.

## encrypted swap

find the unique partition and use it as swap (UUID is always different, so not
usable)

```sh
find -L /dev/disk -samefile /dev/sda2
```

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
swap /dev/disk/by-id/ata-Samsung_SSD_840_PRO_Series_<...>-part2 /dev/urandom swap,cipher=aes-xts-plain64:sha256
```

```sh
/etc/fstab:
/dev/mapper/swap none swap sw 0 0
```

After a reboot `lsblk` output will be

```sh
NAME     MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
sda        8:0    0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdb        8:16   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdc        8:32   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sdd        8:48   0   3,7T  0 disk  
sde        8:64   0 119,2G  0 disk  
├─sde1     8:65   0     1G  0 part  /boot
├─sde2     8:66   0    16G  0 part  
│ └─swap 253:1    0    16G  0 crypt [SWAP]
└─sde3     8:67   0 102,2G  0 part  
  └─root 253:0    0 102,2G  0 crypt /
```

## encrypt data drives and derive keys from root

In our case we plan to use a ZFS RAID on top of LUKS encrypted drives. This can be done by either encrypting the whole drives or individual a partition on each drive. It could be that having the partition encrypted might be a bit safer since the luks header is not at the beginning of the drive in case some other program accidentally overwrote it (see [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/571581/are-there-any-advantages-disadvantages-if-any-in-running-luksformat-on-raw-dr)).
Since using LUKS on the partition doesn't really hurt and ZFS can work with whole disks of partitions we are going to do that.

So first we're going to create new partition tables using fdisk or another tool.
Then we create a partition that's leaving about 100MB spare in case a replacement disk is a little (even a few sectors) smaller (got the idea [here](https://www.freebsddiary.org/zfs-with-gpart.php)).
To leave that amount of space we're calculating the exact end sector:
With a sector size of 512 byte 200MB is 390625 sectors.
So with a drive with 10TB and 19532873728 sectors the start sector is 2048 (because or the partition table) and the end sector is 19532481054. 

```bash
root@openmediavault:~# fdisk /dev/sda

Welcome to fdisk (util-linux 2.38.1).
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
Be careful before using the write command.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 9.1 TiB, 10000831348736 bytes, 19532873728 sectors
Disk model: WDC WD102KFBX-68
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 1D2C9CA2-615C-694B-8C22-A255236BA674

Command (m for help): n
Partition number (1-128, default 1): 
First sector (2048-19532873694, default 2048): 
Last sector, +/-sectors or +/-size{K,M,G,T,P} (2048-19532873694, default 19532871679): 19532481054

Created a new partition 1 of type 'Linux filesystem' and of size 9.1 TiB.

Command (m for help): p
Disk /dev/sda: 9.1 TiB, 10000831348736 bytes, 19532873728 sectors
Disk model: WDC WD102KFBX-68
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 4096 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 4096 bytes / 4096 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 1D2C9CA2-615C-694B-8C22-A255236BA674

Device     Start         End     Sectors  Size Type
/dev/sda1   2048 19532481054 19532479007  9.1T Linux filesystem

```

I setup for each data drive the same LUKS key and a second key that is derived
from root decrypt. This way at boot only one key is necessary but "in case"
the drives can be unlocked on their own.

Again, with `lsblk` show all drives.

### enrypt drives with backup key

Initial creation will be with an initial key, which is used to unlock in case
of emergency.

```sh
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sda1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdb1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdc1
cryptsetup --cipher aes-xts-plain64 -s 512 -h sha256 --iter-time 5000 luksFormat /dev/sdd1
```

### create keyfiles and crypttab

Now lets add the keyfile to the encrypted partitions.
First create a random keyfile

```sh
dd bs=512 count=4 if=/dev/random iflag=fullblock | install -m 0600 /dev/stdin /root/.luks/keyfile
```


```sh
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sda1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdb1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdc1 /root/.luks/keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/sdd1 /root/.luks/keyfile
```

`cryptsetup luksDump /dev/sda` now shows 2 keys.

Next append to `crypttab`, timeout is added to make it boot even in case of error. It might be preferrable to choose another name instead of sdX-crypt since the letters can change. One could use the serialnumber or model number of the device. Find it by running `find -L /dev/disk -samefile /dev/sda` and match it to the UUID.

```sh
/etc/crypttab:
# data drives
sda-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdb-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdc-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
sdd-crypt         UUID=xxxx          /root/.luks/keyfile           luks,timeout=10s
```

Reboot and check if everything is mounted correctly. This example was kept from the forked repository. With different drives the output will differ. When choosing different names in the crypttab the mounting points will also differ.

```sh
lsblk
NAME        MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE  MOUNTPOINT
sda           8:0    0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sda-crypt 253:2    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdb           8:16   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdb-crypt 253:4    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdc           8:32   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdc-crypt 253:5    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sdd           8:48   0   3,7T  0 disk  
└─sdd-crypt 253:3    0   3,7T  0 crypt
sde           8:64   0 119,2G  0 disk  
├─sde1        8:65   0     1G  0 part  /boot
├─sde2        8:66   0    16G  0 part  
│ └─swap    253:1    0    16G  0 crypt [SWAP]
└─sde3        8:67   0 102,2G  0 part  
  └─root    253:0    0 102,2G  0 crypt /
```

From here you may start to use OMV as you like. If a drive is appended, use
the commands from above and add it to `/etc/crypttab`.

> OMV drive encryption plugin is usable as well to add the key and backup headers.

## create zfs pool

Now whenever normaly refering to `/dev/sda` just use `/dev/mapper/sda-crypt` instead.

```sh
zpool create drivepool raidz /dev/mapper/sda-crypt /dev/mapper/sdb-crypt /dev/mapper/sdc-crypt /dev/mapper/sdd-crypt
```

This will create a raid pool with all four disks and a RAID 5 (1 drive parity) configuration.
Read some more about ZFS Configuration in the [Debian Wiki/ZFS article](https://wiki.debian.org/ZFS).

> OMV ZFS plugin can be used to check on the drive pool.
